### An Analysis of Parking Meter Usage in San Diego

**NOTE:** If the Jupyter notebook does not load in GitHub, please copy and paste its URL to 
[nbviewer](http://nbviewer.jupyter.org/) (or click on the Notebook link below)

#### Introduction
In 2015, the City of San Diego adopted an ambitious Climate Action Plan (CAP) intended to reduce half of all greenhouse gas emissions by 2035. In order to meet this target, the City has proposed a number of strategies involving transportation, including strategies to reduce the amount of time drivers spend on unnecessary driving or idling in traffic. One approach recently taken in other cities is implementing dynamic parking meter pricing. The reasoning is that by analyzing driver demand at different locations and different times of day, it is possible to adjust parking meter rates so that a given block will have between 70-80% of its meters occupied every hour. This means that there is always an available parking spot for those willing to pay the rate (drivers do not need to circle the block fruitlessly), and that people unwilling to pay that rate may be instead encouraged to carpool, or use other means of transportation (e.g. mass transit).

Currently the City implements static pricing at its meters, although there are rate (and time limit) differences in different parts of the city. Given that the City collects (and makes available) all parking meter transactions, the goal of this project is to describe the current parking meter occupancy over the course of a 'typical' weekday, and to determine whether the available data is sufficient to indicate whether the City *should* move to a dynamic pricing strategy.

#### Method
Data was downloaded from the City of San Diego's [Open Data Portal](https://data.sandiego.gov/). Datasets used were 'treas_parking_payments_2019_datasd.csv' (all 2019 transactions-to-date ) and 'treas_parking_meters_loc_datasd.csv' (information about all parking meter locations).

Parking occupancy was calculated on a per-sub-area basis. A single sub-area, defined in the City meter locations file, includes all the parking meters on a (usually) one-block long stretch of street. For example, the '700 FIFTEENTH ST' sub-area includes the 12 parking meters on 7th Ave between F St and G St. Parking occupancy was calculated for every hour (between the hours of 8am - 8pm) for Tuesdays-Thursdays (in order to capture a typical weekday). Sub-area occupancy during a single hour was the number of spaces occupied by at least one vehicle during that hour divided by the total number of spaces available in that sub-area. Mean sub-area occupancy was then calculated for every hour over all days in the analysis period.

Details of the processing steps can be found in the [Data_Preparation](https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/mwesterfield/Portfolio/blob/master/SD_ParkingMeters/Data_Preparation.ipynb) Jupyter notebook.

#### Results
A visualization of meter occupancy rates is displayed on Tableau Public: [SD_ParkingMeter_Occupancy](https://public.tableau.com/views/SD_ParkingMeter_Occupancy_v2/Dashboard1?:embed=y&:display_count=yes&publish=yes&:origin=viz_share_link). The top display shows how occupancy rates (coded by color) change over the course of the day (use the slider on the upper right to step through hours (starting point is 8 = 8:00am, ending point is 20 = 7:59pm). For comparison, the bottom two displays show the variation in meter rates and meter time limits across the city.

Separate boxplots provide additional information about whether the current meter pricing strategy results in optimal performance ([Occupancy according to rate](https://public.tableau.com/views/SD_ParkingMeter_BoxPlots/Dashboard2?:embed=y&:display_count=yes&:origin=viz_share_link). These plots show the median occupancy (left plot) and the maximum occupancy (right plot) per meter during a typical weekday according to the meter hourly rate ($0.50, $0.75, $1.00, or $1.25). The median occupancy plots indicate that *in general* the $0.50, $0.75, and $1.00 meters are priced appropriately, as most meters have occupancies within the 70-83% range. However, the $0.50 and $0.75 meters appear to be over-impacted during peak occupancy times. The City might consider raising the rates on those meters during peak hours. In contrast, the majority of $1.25 meters appear to be appropriately priced during peak hours but are underutilized in general, which suggests that price reductions during off-hours might be appropriate. The large number of $1.25 meters falling in the 1st and 4th quartiles (of both median and maximum occupancy boxplots) also suggests that perhaps some of those meters should be placed in different rate categories altogether.

#### Discussion
The variation in demand across the course of the day suggests that San Diego, similar to other cities, might benefit from a dynamic pricing approach. A more careful follow-up analysis would be warranted before drawing any strong conclusions about implementing this strategy, however. Others that have attempted this type of analysis warn that parking meter transactions are not necessarily a true measure of occupancy. Drivers can leave their cars at a meter beyond meter expiration, and drivers that make use of disabled placards or other permits do not register in meter transactions at all. However the City of San Diego *does* have access to data that would allow a more accurate analysis. The CityIQ Parking API can provide historic data about parking events tied to specific geographic locations. These parking events would be more accurate as the sensors record the actual physical presence of a car in a pre-defined location (such as adjacent to a parking meter). In addition, the City of San Diego (temporarily?) installed car-detection sensors in a limited set of parking meters in Hillcrest in 2017; if that data is available, if could provide similarly accurate information about parking occupancy. My own recommendation would be to repeat this analysis using CityIQ data--barring snags (e.g. difficulty obtaining the data), the project should be completed fairly quickly (one to two weeks) and would provide a sound basis for any future decisions around dynamic meter pricing.
